ci: Revise open-source release process (#2250)
contentauth/c2pa-rs: docs/release-process.md

# Open-source release process

This document describes how we release `c2pa-rs` and its related crates, and the branching model that supports it. It applies to the **0.x (pre-1.0) phase**; we will revisit it as we approach a 1.0 stability commitment.

## Goals

> We have two goals that pull against each other:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have two main goals:
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

> * **Move fast on pre-1.0 refactors.** While we're below 1.0, we want freedom to make breaking API changes and larger refactors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Move fast on pre-1.0 refactors.** While we're below 1.0, we may make larger refactors and breaking API changes.
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

> * **Be stable and predictable for users** (including ourselves and the other language bindings that build on this crate): a steady stream of features, plus breaking changes that arrive on a *known schedule* rather than at random.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Be stable and predictable as much as possible for users** (including ourselves and the other language bindings that build on this crate): a steady stream of features, plus breaking changes that arrive on a pre-determined *known schedule*
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

> We reconcile them with one core principle.

Reviewer: (I'd remove that)

Author: Done.

Author: Removed in the core-principle reword — thanks!

## Core principle: split by breaking vs. non-breaking

> What matters to someone depending on this crate isn't whether a change is "big" — it's whether it breaks their build. An additive feature costs them nothing; a changed or removed API forces a migration. So we govern those two kinds of change on two different tracks, which map directly onto pre-1.0 Cargo semantics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What matters to someone depending on this crate isn't whether a change is "big" — it's whether it breaks their build. An additive feature costs them nothing; a changed or removed API forces a migration with potential fixes and updates to their build system. So we govern those two kinds of change on two different tracks, which map directly onto pre-1.0 Cargo semantics:
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

| Change kind | Version slot | Cargo treats it as | Track |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| Additive / non-breaking | `0.x.y` (bump `y`) | compatible | **Track 1** — fast, continuous |
| Breaking | `0.x.0` (bump `x`) | incompatible | **Track 2** — scheduled "train" |

> Most changes never wait for the train: anything additive ships continuously, and only breaking changes are batched and scheduled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most changes never wait for the train: anything additive merges to main continuously, and only breaking changes are batched and scheduled.
```
(I think? I don't think we continuously bake minor releases?)

Author: Other way around: _Everything_ merges to main ASAP after passing CI gates. Those changes that are non-breaking are also ported to the stable branch and can then be released fairly quickly. I've updated the wording to that effect.

Author: Right — reworded to "ships fairly quickly by being backported to the stable release train" to avoid implying we continuously bake minor releases.

## Branching model

| Branch | Role | Published to crates.io? |
| -- | -- | -- |

> | `main` | Always green but API-unstable ("nightly-like"). It must always compile and pass tests, but its public API is **not** guaranteed stable — it may contain unstabilized or feature-gated work. | **No** |

Reviewer: Do you want to cross-reference the support tiers here?

Author: Done — added a "How the tiers gate merges and releases" section to `docs/support-tiers.md` and a "Validation gating" section here, cross-linked both ways.

| `stable` | Tracks the most-recent crates.io release and is the currently-active release line. Additive (`0.x.y`) releases, and the promoted breaking (`0.x.0`) release, are published from here. | **Yes** |

> | `v0.x` (e.g. `v0.89`) | A long-lived branch for a **retired** release line, snapshotted from `stable` when that line is retired. The target for the rare backport to a retired line. | Yes (rare backports) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `v0.x` (e.g. `v0.89`) | A long-lived branch for a **retired** release line, snapshotted from `stable` when that line is retired. The potential target for the rare backport to a retired line. | Yes (rare backports) |
```

Author: Agreed. Adjusted the language slightly.

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

| `0.(x+1).0-rc.N` (release-candidate branch) | A transient breaking candidate, cut from `main`, that bakes before promotion. Its name contains `-rc.` so it is validated by CI but **never** matches a publish trigger. | **No** |

The branch-name conventions are also the publish guard: the publish workflow only ever runs on `stable` and `v0.*`, and the `-rc.`-named candidate matches neither, so a candidate can never be published by construction.

Two rules keep this coherent:

* **Upstream-first.** Every change lands on `main` first. Release-line branches only ever *receive* changes (via cherry-pick); nothing originates on them. This guarantees `main` is always the superset and that nothing is lost across a major bump. A scheduled [reconciliation check](#reconciliation-check) enforces this.

> * **`main` stays releasable.** Destabilizing work happens on feature branches off `main`, merged only once coherent.

Reviewer: I think then this needs a mention/cross-link with the support tiers indeed.

Author: Done — added a "How the tiers gate merges and releases" section to `docs/support-tiers.md` and a "Validation gating" section here, cross-linked both ways.

> **A note on cherry-picking.** Cherry-picking transfers individual fixes between branches without merging everything. Because actively-supported lines can diverge over time, a fix that applies cleanly on one branch may not cherry-pick directly onto another. In that case the change may need to be adapted to compile, integrate, and pass tests on the target branch — or, if the branches have diverged enough, implemented separately for each supported branch.

## Track 1 — Additive releases (`0.x.y`)

> Low-risk, non-breaking features and bug fixes ship continuously:

Reviewer: `ship continuously` is really confusing everywhere. I would differentiate merge to main versus shipping as in "shipping a release".

Author: Agreed this was the most confusing part. Replaced "ships continuously" throughout with "ships quickly on the current release train," dropped the "soak the change" phrasing, and reworked the text to distinguish landing on `main` from shipping a release.

1. The change lands on `main` (gated by Tier 1A CI like any PR).
2. It is cherry-picked onto the current release line (`stable`) by the [backport bot](#backport-bot) when you add a `backport-stable` label to the merged PR.
3. release-plz opens a release PR on `stable`; merging it publishes `0.x.y`.

Key points:

> * **Short (~1-day) bake.** Additive releases (`0.x.y`, y ≥ 1) don't need a full release-candidate stage, but we do hold a brief bake — approximately one business day — before the crates.io publish, to re-verify compatibility against the downstream projects we maintain (the other language bindings). This is far lighter than the breaking train's bake; it exists to catch integration surprises, not to soak the change. (An optional `0.x.y-rc.N` soak can additionally be used for a change that warrants extra caution.)

Reviewer: That's the important difference between merge and ship/release

Author: Agreed this was the most confusing part. Replaced "ships continuously" throughout with "ships quickly on the current release train," dropped the "soak the change" phrasing, and reworked the text to distinguish landing on `main` from shipping a release.

> * **Short (~1-day) bake.** Additive releases (`0.x.y`, y ≥ 1) don't need a full release-candidate stage, but we do hold a brief bake — approximately one business day — before the crates.io publish, to re-verify compatibility against the downstream projects we maintain (the other language bindings). This is far lighter than the breaking train's bake; it exists to catch integration surprises, not to soak the change. (An optional `0.x.y-rc.N` soak can additionally be used for a change that warrants extra caution.)

Reviewer: "soak the change"?

Author: Agree; that's confusing. Removed.

Author: Removed that phrasing.

* **Compatibility is verified, not assumed.** Every additive release is gated on [`cargo-semver-checks`](#semver-checks) so an accidental break can't ship as a "patch."

## Track 2 — The breaking train (`0.x.0`)

Breaking changes and larger refactors are batched onto a scheduled train:

1. On the scheduled date, a release-candidate branch `0.(x+1).0-rc.1` is cut from `main`. **RC branches are not published to crates.io** (their name keeps them off every publish trigger).

> 2. **Bake period: minimum 3 days.** Only bug fixes are accepted during the bake, and they follow upstream-first (fix on `main`, cherry-pick to the candidate). Hold longer than 3 days if needed to validate across the downstream projects we maintain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Bake period: minimum 3 business days.** Only bug fixes are accepted during the bake, and they follow upstream-first (fix on `main`, cherry-pick to the candidate). Hold longer than 3 days if needed to validate across the downstream projects we maintain.
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

* **Skip if empty.** If the date arrives with no breaking changes queued, we skip the train. A major bump that breaks everyone for no new value is pure cost — and it's safe to skip because Track 1 is already delivering value continuously.
* **Don't hold the train.** If breaking changes are queued, the candidate is cut on the date regardless. An almost-finished breaking feature waits for the *next* train. This is what turns "we have a cadence" into "we have predictability."
* **Anchor on the cut date,** not the release date, so the bake window absorbs slippage.

A side effect of skip-if-empty: the middle version number stops being a clock and becomes a true signal that a breaking change happened. Recency therefore comes from dated changelogs, not the version number.

## Keeping additive changes additive

The model only works if we stay disciplined about keeping the fast lane non-breaking:

* **Review norm:** "Can this ship additively? If yes, it goes out now. If it requires a break, it waits for the next train."

> * **Forward-compat tools:** prefer `#[non_exhaustive]` (enums/structs), sealed traits, and default trait methods so future additions stay compatible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Forward-compatible tools:** prefer `#[non_exhaustive]` (enums/structs), sealed traits, and default trait methods so future additions stay compatible.
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

> * **Deprecate-then-remove:** when we must break, add the replacement API additively now and mark the old one `#[deprecated]`. Removal of the old API rides a later train, after the deprecation window elapses. See the [deprecation policy](deprecation-policy.md). Users get the improvement immediately and a window to migrate.

Reviewer 2: Relates to my other comment about having these two strictly paired.

Author: Addressed together with the deprecation-policy thread — deprecation and replacement stay paired; see the updated `deprecation-policy.md`.

* **Extract-with-re-export:** moving code into a separate crate is additive as long as the public paths are preserved by re-exporting (`pub use`). See [extracted crates](#extracted-crates-multi-repo).

## Extracted crates (multi-repo)

> We are extracting stable, low-churn code out of `c2pa-rs` into independent crates, each in its own repository, so that this code is not rebuilt on every PR to `c2pa-rs` `main`. The first example is **`c2pa-raw-crypto`** — the raw cryptographic signature primitives, now in their own [`contentauth/c2pa-raw-crypto`](https://github.com/contentauth/c2pa-raw-crypto) repo. These crates are versioned **independently** (lockstep versioning would re-couple the build times we're trying to separate).

Reviewer: The first example technical was `c2pa-cbor` :) . Might want to mention that crate anyway!

Author: Good call. Changed it. (Also, we haven't yet landed the `c2pa-raw-crypto` change.)

Author: Good catch — switched the example (and the canary) to `c2pa_cbor` / `contentauth/c2pa-cbor`, since `c2pa-raw-crypto` isn't extracted yet.

> Once a subproject lives in its own repo and is published, `c2pa-rs` depends on it by version (`c2pa-raw-crypto = "0.2"`) like any third-party crate. That reframes the "wait period" from a scheduling problem into a dependency-edge problem:

Reviewer 2: Any thoughts on pinning specific versions of subproject crates, or would we use `^` or something else?

Author: Tight pins can create usability problems for library consumers, so I'm wary of doing that. We already have the nightly crate-drift canary and the semver pins should prevent us from introducing breaking changes.

Reviewer: (Also I think we already had bug reports sometimes asking to loosen that because it created issues downstream for users too).

Author: We'll use a normal caret requirement (e.g. `c2pa_cbor = "0.77"`) and let `Cargo.lock` pin the exact version for reproducible builds — same as any other dependency. Now documented in the extracted-crates section.

> * **Extracted crates leave the train.** Each gets a simple, as-needed release (cut one when a change lands, `cargo-semver-checks`-gated). Because they rarely change, they have no meaningful wait period of their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Extracted crates leave this repo's release train.** Each gets a simple, as-needed release (cut one when a change lands, `cargo-semver-checks`-gated). Because they rarely change, they have no meaningful wait period of their own.
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

### release-plz

We use [release-plz](https://release-plz.dev) (via the [GitHub Action wrapper](https://github.com/release-plz/action)), configured by [`release-plz.toml`](../release-plz.toml). Its two responsibilities are split across two workflows, both of which run on the **release-line and release-candidate branches** — never on `main`:

* [`release-pr.yml`](../.github/workflows/release-pr.yml) runs `release-plz release-pr`: for each published crate it inspects commits since the last tag and opens/updates a **release PR** that bumps the version and updates the changelog. The release PR is labeled `release`, which triggers the full Tier 1B and Tier 2 suites (see [validation gating](#validation-gating)).
* [`release.yml`](../.github/workflows/release.yml) runs `release-plz release`: when a release PR merges (a push to the release-line branch), it publishes the changed crates to crates.io, creates GitHub releases, and tags them `(crate-name)-v(version)`. It then builds and uploads the `c2patool` binaries and SBOMs. A push whose ref contains `-rc.` never publishes.

How release-plz chooses a version, per crate:

* If only bug-fix commits are detected, bump the patch number (`y`).

> * If API additions or breaking changes are detected, bump the middle number (`x`). (Pre-1.0, Cargo treats a middle-number bump as incompatible; this becomes the major-number bump after 1.0.)

Reviewer 2: After 1.0, how and when would we use the middle-number (minor version)?

Author: I _think_ the answer is that we'd use the middle number for each new release train as we are here. If there's nothing significantly new to release (i.e. semver would say don't bump the middle number), then I'd say we should skip that release train.

But that's a question we can resolve as we approach 1.0.

Reviewer: I would have thought we'd follow semver. Maybe some release trains would only have bugfixes, who knows!

Author: Post-1.0 we move to standard SemVer (minor = additive, major = breaking); pre-1.0 the middle number carries "breaking" because Cargo treats `0.x` that way. This doc is explicitly 0.x-scoped and we'll revisit at the 1.0 commitment.

### Semver checks

[`semver-checks.yml`](../.github/workflows/semver-checks.yml) runs [`cargo-semver-checks`](https://github.com/obi1kenobi/cargo-semver-checks) on every PR targeting a release-line branch (including backport PRs), baselining against the latest crates.io release. It catches a change that would be an accidental break shipping as an additive release. It does **not** run on `-rc.*` branches — the train is the intended place for breaking changes.

### Patch-dependency guard

[`check-no-patch-deps.yml`](../.github/workflows/check-no-patch-deps.yml) fails if a `[patch]` section or a git dependency is present. It runs on release-branch PRs and as a required prerequisite of `release.yml`, so a `[patch]` left over from co-developing an extracted crate can never leak into a publish.

### Release-train cut

> [`release-train-cut.yml`](../.github/workflows/release-train-cut.yml) runs every Monday and gates on a date check so it only acts on the second Monday of an odd-numbered month (or when dispatched manually with `force: true`). When it fires it computes the next breaking version, applies skip-if-empty, and — if there's breaking work to ship — pushes a new `0.(x+1).0-rc.1` candidate branch from `main` and opens a `release-train` tracking issue describing the bake and the manual-promotion step.

Reviewer: When on Monday? (Hour + timezone?)

Author: Added: second Monday of odd months at 16:00 UTC, matching `release-train-cut.yml`.

### Cross-repo canary

[`canary-extracted-crates.yml`](../.github/workflows/canary-extracted-crates.yml) builds `c2pa-rs` `main` against the `main` of each extracted crate via a throwaway `[patch]`, and files an issue on failure. The `[patch]` exists only inside the runner; the patch-dependency guard guarantees it can never reach a release.

### Label sync

Labels the process depends on are version-controlled in [`.github/labels.yml`](../.github/labels.yml) and synced by [`labels.yml`](../.github/workflows/labels.yml).

## Validation gating

* **Backport PRs** run Tier 1A plus `cargo-semver-checks` — fast feedback on each cherry-pick.
* **The release-plz release PR** carries the `release` label and therefore runs the full **Tier 1A + 1B + 2** suite. This is the comprehensive gate immediately before a crates.io publish, and the natural home for the short (~1-day) downstream re-verification.
* To force the full suite on an individual risky backport before it reaches the release branch, add the `check-release` label to that backport PR.

See [docs/support-tiers.md](support-tiers.md) for what each tier covers.

> ## What we are deliberately NOT doing

Reviewer: I would remove the section, we don't want to list "bad" precedents?

Author: Removed the "What we are deliberately NOT doing" section.

A quick, non-authoritative summary — the PR title must have this exact format:

```
type(scope): description
```

The `type` must be one of (bold = preferred in most cases):

* **`feat`**: a new feature. Use a `!` immediately before the `:` to signal an API breaking change (which queues for the next train).
* **`fix`**: a bug fix.
* **`chore`**: maintenance; does not trigger a release PR and is omitted from the changelog.
* **`docs`**: documentation.
* `build`, `ci`, `perf`, `refactor`, `revert`, `style`, `test`, `update` (the last used by Dependabot).

`scope` is optional; if present it must be one of `c2patool`, `export_schema`, `make_test_images`, `sdk`, or `c2pa_c_ffi`. If omitted, drop the parentheses too. `description` is a short sentence, capitalized, no trailing period, preferably under 70 characters.

> MAINTENANCE NOTE: if these rules change, keep [`.github/workflows/pr_title.yml`](../.github/workflows/pr_title.yml) and [`.commitlintrc.yml`](../.commitlintrc.yml) in sync.

## Known issues

### Failure to update downstream crates

> In repos that host multiple crates, an earlier crate in the dependency chain can warrant a release while a crate that depends on it has no commits of its own. release-plz updates the downstream version reference but doesn't always cut a new release of the downstream crate. (See [issue #2164](https://github.com/release-plz/release-plz/issues/2164) and [PR #2196](https://github.com/release-plz/release-plz/pull/2196).) Workaround: post a no-op change (a whitespace tweak or comment) to the downstream crate to trigger a release PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In repos that host multiple crates, an earlier crate in the dependency chain can warrant a release while a crate that depends on it has no commits of its own. `release-plz` updates the downstream version reference but doesn't always cut a new release of the downstream crate. (See [issue #2164](https://github.com/release-plz/release-plz/issues/2164) and [PR #2196](https://github.com/release-plz/release-plz/pull/2196).) Workaround: post a no-op change (a whitespace tweak or comment) to the downstream crate to trigger a release PR.
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

### Left-behind release branches

> release-plz sometimes creates a new release branch + PR instead of updating the existing one, leaving the old branch behind. To reduce noise, [`release-pr.yml`](../.github/workflows/release-pr.yml) deletes stale `release-plz-*` branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`release-plz` sometimes creates a new release branch + PR instead of updating the existing one, leaving the old branch behind. To reduce noise, [`release-pr.yml`](../.github/workflows/release-pr.yml) deletes stale `release-plz-*` branches.
```

Author: Applied in the latest revision — thanks!

* **Deprecate-then-remove:** when we must break, add the replacement API additively now and mark the old one `#[deprecated]`. Removal of the old API rides a later train, after the deprecation window elapses. See the [deprecation policy](deprecation-policy.md). Users get the improvement immediately and a window to migrate.
* **Extract-with-re-export:** moving code into a separate crate is additive as long as the public paths are preserved by re-exporting (`pub use`). See [extracted crates](#extracted-crates-multi-repo).

## Extracted crates (multi-repo)

We are extracting stable, low-churn code out of `c2pa-rs` into independent crates, each in its own repository, so that this code is not rebuilt on every PR to `c2pa-rs` `main`. The first example is **`c2pa_cbor`** — the CBOR (de)serialization primitives used throughout C2PA manifests, now in their own [`contentauth/c2pa-cbor`](https://github.com/contentauth/c2pa-cbor) repo. These crates are versioned **independently** (lockstep versioning would re-couple the build times we're trying to separate).

> Once a subproject lives in its own repo and is published, `c2pa-rs` depends on it by version (`c2pa_cbor = "0.77"`) like any third-party crate. That reframes the "wait period" from a scheduling problem into a dependency-edge problem:

Reviewer 3: Prefer full x.y.z versions?

Author: We'll use a caret requirement with `Cargo.lock` pinning the exact version (same as any other dep) rather than `=x.y.z` in `Cargo.toml`. Now documented in the extracted-crates section.

* **Backport exceptions** to a retired line are rare and reserved for a correctness or security issue with no reasonable upgrade path for the affected consumer — in practice, security fixes and critical downstream emergencies only. Such a backport targets that line's `v0.x` branch.

## Automation

Cutting a release is mostly a CI action rather than manual toil. The pieces:

### `release-plz`

We use [`release-plz`](https://release-plz.dev) (via the [GitHub Action wrapper](https://github.com/release-plz/action)), configured by [`release-plz.toml`](../release-plz.toml). Its two responsibilities are split across two workflows, both of which run on the **release-line and release-candidate branches** — never on `main`:

* [`release-pr.yml`](../.github/workflows/release-pr.yml) runs `release-plz release-pr`: for each published crate it inspects commits since the last tag and opens/updates a **release PR** that bumps the version and updates the changelog. Because that PR targets a release-line branch, it runs the full Tier 1A + 1B + 2 suite (see [validation gating](#validation-gating)).

> * [`release.yml`](../.github/workflows/release.yml) runs `release-plz release`: when a release PR merges (a push to the release-line branch), it publishes the changed crates to crates.io, creates GitHub releases, and tags them `(crate-name)-v(version)`. It then builds and uploads the `c2patool` binaries and SBOMs. A push whose ref contains `-rc.` never publishes.

Reviewer 3: Not a blocker, but we should consider using [GitHub immutable releases](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/concepts/supply-chain-security/immutable-releases) in this workflow.
> The use of this type of release increases security by blocking supply chain attacks. Attackers cannot:
> - Inject vulnerabilities or malware into current project releases.
> - Make changes to assets and tags that may break developer workflows.

Author: Agree that it sounds like a good idea and I tried that a few months ago. It's incompatible with the workflow of uploading the c2patool binaries and SBOMs after the release is created.

If there's a way to stall creating the release until those artifacts are created, I'm open to it, but IMHO it's out of scope for this PR.

Author: Good idea — noted as a follow-up for `release.yml`; not blocking this PR.

### Label sync

Labels the process depends on are version-controlled in [`.github/labels.yml`](../.github/labels.yml) and synced by [`labels.yml`](../.github/workflows/labels.yml).

## Validation gating

The [support tiers](support-tiers.md) map directly onto the branching model:

* **Merging to `main`** requires **Tier 1A** — the merge gate for everyday development.
* **Any PR targeting a release-line (`stable`, `v0.x`) or release-candidate (`*-rc.*`) branch** must pass the **full Tier 1A + 1B + 2 suite** before it can merge. This includes **backport PRs**, RC bake bugfix PRs, and the `release-plz` release PR — anything headed for a published (or soon-to-be-published) artifact gets the most thorough validation we have. PRs targeting release lines additionally run [`cargo-semver-checks`](#semver-checks).
* During a train's bake, Tier 1A + 1B + 2 also run on every push to the `*-rc.*` branch.
* **All three tiers also run against `main` on a daily schedule** (a nightly run), catching regressions that only appear under the heavier Tier 1B/2 configurations even when no release-targeting PR is open.

> * On a `main` PR you can opt into the full suite on demand by adding the `check-release` label (useful to assess release-readiness before a change is backported).

Reviewer 3: Can we make these part of the branch protection rules? We can require these workflows must succeed before merging and also that the branch being tested must be updated to the latest commit.

Author: Added a "Branch protection" section recommending exactly that (require PRs, required checks, and require-branch-up-to-date). The setting itself is repo config, so it's documented rather than committed.

A quick, non-authoritative summary — the PR title must have this exact format:

```
type(scope): description
```

The `type` must be one of (bold = preferred in most cases):

* **`feat`**: a new feature. Use a `!` immediately before the `:` to signal an API breaking change (which queues for the next train).
* **`fix`**: a bug fix.
* **`chore`**: maintenance; does not trigger a release PR and is omitted from the changelog.
* **`docs`**: documentation.
* `build`, `ci`, `perf`, `refactor`, `revert`, `style`, `test`, `update` (the last used by Dependabot).

`scope` is optional; if present it must be one of `c2patool`, `export_schema`, `make_test_images`, `sdk`, or `c2pa_c_ffi`. If omitted, drop the parentheses too. `description` is a short sentence, capitalized, no trailing period, preferably under 70 characters.

> MAINTENANCE NOTE: if these rules change, keep [`.github/workflows/pr_title.yml`](../.github/workflows/pr_title.yml) and [`.commitlintrc.yml`](../.commitlintrc.yml) in sync.

## Known issues

### Failure to update downstream crates

> In repos that host multiple crates, an earlier crate in the dependency chain can warrant a release while a crate that depends on it has no commits of its own. `release-plz` updates the downstream version reference but doesn't always cut a new release of the downstream crate. (See [issue #2164](https://github.com/release-plz/release-plz/issues/2164) and [PR #2196](https://github.com/release-plz/release-plz/pull/2196).) Workaround: post a no-op change (a whitespace tweak or comment) to the downstream crate to trigger a release PR.

Reviewer 3: Maybe leave a comment on the issues to remove this in the release-process.md when fixed?

Author: Filed our own tracking issue #2298 for this (rather than commenting on the upstream release-plz issue) and linked it from the note here, so we remember to trim it once it's resolved upstream.

### Left-behind release branches

> `release-plz` sometimes creates a new release branch + PR instead of updating the existing one, leaving the old branch behind. To reduce noise, [`release-pr.yml`](../.github/workflows/release-pr.yml) deletes stale `release-plz-*` branches.

Reviewer 3: Is this a bug in release-plz? Maybe it's fixed or needs to be reported?

Author: It's a `release-plz` quirk. Filed #2299 to track it (and to confirm/report upstream if it isn't already), linked from the note here.
